---
layout: "post"
title: "Ramping Up Energy Storage: Designing a Sustainable Mechanical Battery"
author: "Avi Gulati (‘20)"
print_publication: true
tags: issue3
categories: Perspectives
related_image: 
---

*As the world population rises and a global consumer-driven culture intensifies, scientists and leaders alike must streamline energy storage practices with ethical and sustainable solutions. We propose a mechanical ramp battery that stores gravitational potential energy from input work required to push an object up an incline at a constant speed. The battery releases energy that can be measured through output work required to bring the object down an incline at a constant speed. Friction is an inherent part of this battery and is why we prioritized efficiencies, calculating energy storage efficiency to be 0.996, energy release efficiency, 0.960, and overall efficiency, 0.957. With respect to efficiency, this battery compares well to the Lithium-Ion battery and is already being tested by the US Bureau of Land Management in the Advanced Rail Energy Storage experiment (ARES). While we only assess the efficiency of this battery for one specific ramp, it is crucial to evaluate how the angle of the ramp to the horizontal, strength of the materials, and the way energy is being stored and released affects efficiency. Considering these factors, mechanical batteries can bring us one step closer to solving the global energy demand and facilitating other sustainable energy storage practices.*

<!--excerpt-->

**Introduction**

	Aristotle observed, “The energy of the mind is the essence of life.” While his statement certainly rang true 2 millennia ago, now, humans must consider the concrete energy we store as an essence of life. 
	In his seminal work Energy Transitions, professor and energy historian Vaclav Smil discovered that in the 1860s, Americans used one fifteenth of the energy they use now. Through the 1900s, as global economic productivity grew by a factor of 16, energy demands rose by a similar factor of 17 (Smil). Thriving economies depend on improving energy storage capacities. Every year now, approximately 140 million impoverished individuals around the world are entering the middle class, corresponding to an ever-increasing rate of personal consumption. (Anthropocene). These new members of the middle class are ultimately spending money on energy: water heaters, air conditioners, refrigerators, cars, meat, and more (Anthropocene). The British Petroleum (BP) Statistical Review of Energy estimates that by 2100, if global energy demands rise to US middle class standards, humans will require 51.4 more Terawatts (TW) of power consumption than the current annual 18 TW. This number only factors economic growth. The United Nations Commission on Population and Development finds that global population will reach 11 billion by the end of the 21st century. Considering solely population growth, BP estimates that annual energy demands will increase anywhere from 25.0 to 28.4 TW. By the end of this century, in total, humans will annually need 74.0 TW more than our current 18.0 TW requirement. 
	Innovators are already exploring beyond present renewable energy forms. For example, Lockheed Martin is considering tidal and wave power, recently launching the Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion project (OTEC) (New York Times), and the District of Columbia is turning sewage into electricity and fertilizer (Washington Post). We can harvest more energy; however, what is most important and often least regarded is how to store this energy. 
	Right now, the US grid has an insufficient capacity for energy storage. 99% of stored energy from different sources like natural gas, coal, and renewables is based on pumped hydroelectric storage (Stanford), which is only fully effective in limited geographic regions. Even worse, grid operators curtail, or “shut down solar panels and wind turbines to reduce the production of surplus electricity” (Schwartz). If it is too windy or too sunny, the grid can overflow and blackouts become possible. As a result, many grid operators resort to curtailment. Some have tried to store surplus energy in Lithium-Ion batteries, but the substantial energy required to produce these batteries reduces the return on energy conservation by 20% (Stanford). We need a successful mechanism for storage because without one, we are losing vital energy. 
	Thus, we seek to engineer an ethical, sustainable mechanical battery: a ramp. The concept is simple. We push an object with constant force up a ramp and bring it down with a constant force such that work in each direction, W, to get the object to the top or bottom of the incline is given by 
                                                                       W=Fd,                                                             (1)          
where F is the constant force required to push up or bring down the object and Δd is the length of the incline. The force will be applied parallel to d so that we can easily calculate work, as we are using a spring balance to push the object. Figure 1 offers a visualization of the input force, denoted by Fp (p for push).

<!--excerpt-->
